Once around, Orcus.
So, Orcus was discovered by Mike Brown
and his associates from Caltech. Um, you
can see it imaged here with the green
ring marking its position. And precovery
images go all the way back to 1951 for
this object. So, again, we have about 50
years of data of its position. And
that's very very helpful in working out
the orbit. The name Orcus comes from the
Roman god of the underworld. And there's
this rather scary uh entrance here which
is supposed to depict Orcus
out there in the Kiper belt. It's been
described as the anti-Pluto.
Its orbit takes 245 years and goes from
30 to 48 astronomical units and is
tilted at 20° to the plane of the solar
system. And so you can see the orbit of
the two objects here. And what we have
is that they are tilted oppositely and
have their perihelia, their close point
to the sun on opposite sides of the sun.
And so they managed to avoid each other
and Neptune very comprehensively. So I
think the anti-Pluto is a very good name
for it.
Its interaction with Pluto and with
Neptune is very similar. It's in a 3:2
orbital resonance with the giant planet
Neptune. So for every three orbits that
Neptune takes, Orcus does two. And it's
called a plutino for that reason because
that is exactly what Pluto does as well.
Observations. Well, there's just this
one little photograph here that I've got
to show you of it out there in space.
Um, a tiny little dot. You'll have to
trust me that it's moving. And
physically, it seems to be quite large.
960 kilometers in diameter, similar to
the size of series, the largest of the
asteroids in the asteroid belt, but
that's still only enough to give it
about 4% the mass of Pluto. So,
relatively low on that front. The
surface is very bright and shiny. 23% of
the light is coming back. That's about
double the reflectivity of an object
like our moon. And it seems to have
water ice in crystalline form on the
surface.
That's interesting because water ice
crystals at this low temperature uh
can't form and they must have formed in
a warmer condition and also
they don't last after a few tens of
thousands of years. They tend to degrade
because of the impact of the solar wind
and the cosmic radiation.
So maybe they're being refreshed by
cryovanic activity from material in the
warm interior of this tiny little dwarf
planet.
And of course we've got ammonia,
methane, and the usual folins, the
complex polymers of carbon, nitrogen,
hydrogen, and oxygen made from ammonia,
methane, water, and carbon monoxide
getting together and triggered to react
by that radiation.
It's very interesting though that it has
a very substantial moon. It's given the
name Vanth and it's 310 km in size
making it only 17th the mass of Orcus.
So this is another of these almost
double objects uh where the ratio
between the primary and the satellite is
really quite uh similar. And Van is
named from the the winged female deity
of the Atruscan underworld. again named
for another object in the underworld.
Very appropriate for these rather uh
distant objects in the dim and gloomy
part of the outer solar system. And so
that's a very quick whistle stop tour
about what we know about Orcus. Thanks
very much for listening to that short
video.